Version 2.2 -- UPDATE - 9 JUNE 2009 - Spencer James and Brian Friesen 
-------------------
SYNOW now reads the input file from STDIN.  Variables for debugging 
(which keeps scratch files instead of deleting them at program 
termination) and the output spectrum file (which defaults to 
'fort.11')are specified from STDIN as well.

A runscript is located in the synow_2.2 directory that can be used for 
running synow and then running the script.

% runsynow.ksh


Introduction
------------

This version of SYNOW is based on code written by D. Branch, then updated
by A. Fisher in the early 1990's.  

SYNOW is a highly parameterized spectrum synthesis code used primarily for
direct (empirical) analysis of SN spectra.  Control of the available 
parameters is accomplished through a namelist input file, read from STDIN.
  An input file has the following format.

 $parms
   
    vphot    =  4000.0
    vmax     = 40000.0
    tbb      = 15000.0
    ea       =  4000.0
    eb       =  8000.0
    nlam     =  1000
    flambda  = .false.
    taumin   =    0.01
    grid     =      32
    zeta     =     1.0
    stspec   =  3500.0
    pwrlaw   = .false.
    pwrlawin =     8.0
    numref   =       2
    spectrum_file = 'fort.11'
    debug_out = .false.

    an       =     1,     2,    16,     6  
    ai       =     0,     1,     1,     1
    tau1     =  5.00,  0.00,  0.10,  0.10
    vmine    =  2.00,  2.00,  2.00, 20.00
    vmaxe    = 40.00, 40.00, 30.00, 30.00
    ve       =  3.00,  3.00,  3.00,  3.00
    temp     = 13.00, 13.00, 13.00, 13.00

 $END

Output from synow is found (after each run) in the file fort.11, in
the three columns of lambda - relative flux - blackbody flux.

Parameters in in.dat
--------------------

(1) vphot      - Velocity at photosphere in km/s.  The photosphere is a 
                 sharply defined sphere, providing continuum radiation at
                 the bottom of the envelope.

(2) vmax       - An artificially imposed upper boundary on the envelope in km/s.
                 Usually set to a value where the optical depths in all lines
                 is probably negligible.

(3) tbb        - Blackbody temperature in K.  The continuum emitted from the
                 photosphere is characterized by this temperature.

(4) ea         - The lowest wavelength to be considered, in Angstroms.  Your
                 plot may actually start at a lower wavelength, because of
                 the stspec parameter below.

(5) eb         - The highest wavelength to be plotted in Angstroms.

(6) nlam       - Number of wavelength points where the spectrum is computed.

(7)  flambda   - Make the output flambda vs lambda instead of fnu vs lambda
                 if set to .true.

(8)  taumin    - Minimum line optical depth to select.  The presence of a 
                 species in the envelope is set by a nonzero optical depth
                 in a reference line of the species (usually the strongest
                 optical line).  All other line optical depths are determined
                 relative to that reference optical depth assuming Boltzmann
                 excitation.  The taumin parameter sets a lower optical
                 depth threshold.  If a line is computed to have optical depth
                 below taumin, it is not included in the line list for the
                 calculation.  If many attempts are needed to get major 
                 features to fit, taumin can be set to a high value.  It 
                 just makes SYNOW only consider stronger lines.

(9)  grid      - Grid resolution.  This number controls the number of radial
                 points used in the calculation, and actually represents the
                 radius of the photosphere in grid points.  This number can
                 be as high as 35, but probably no lower than 5.  Higher values
                 of grid provide better spatial resolution when computing the
                 spectrum and source functions, but also slow down the program.

(10) zeta      - Set to something less than 1 to get a diluted blackbody.  
                 We've never used anything besides 1.

(11) stspec    - Place to start actually computing the spectrum.  This should
                 be lower than the value of ea, by something like 500 
                 angstroms or so.

(12) pwrlaw    - Optical depth in all lines is deployed spatially according
                 to one or two laws.  One of them is a power-law radial
                 density gradient.  If this parameter is set to .true.,
                 then the optical depth in the lines will fall off with
                 radius according to a power law with index pwrlawin.
                 Otherwise, the density profile is exponential (see below).

(13) pwrlawin  - The power law index if optical depths in lines are to fall
                 off like a power law.

(14) numref    - The number of reference optical depths (ions) that will
                 be specified at the end of the file.

The remaining parameters are arranged in columns of ions in the in.dat
file.

(15) an        - Atomic numbers of species to include in the calculation.

(16) ai        - Ionization stages of species included ( 0 = neutral, 1 =
                 first ionization, etc, up to ai = 5).

(17) tau1      - Optical depth in the reference line of the corresponding
                 (an, ai) ion at vphot.  Usually the reference line of
                 an ion is the strongest optical line of that ion.  So
                 for H I it is H-alpha 6563.  The optical depth in this
                 line at all radii is determined by the choice of 
                 powerlaw-falloff or exponential-falloff.  All other 
                 lines of this ion have optical depths determined relative
                 to the reference line, assuming Boltzmann excitation.

(18) vmine     - Lowest velocity in the envelope where the (an, ai) ion
                 is present.  If vmine > vphot, then tau1 refers to the
                 optical depth in the reference line that *would be*
                 present at the photosphere if vmine <= vphot.  So
                 if vmine > vphot, tau1 is *not* the optical depth in
                 the line at vmine, it is *lower*.  If vmine > vphot,
                 we say the ion is ``detached'' from the photosphere.
                 Units are in 1000's of km/s.

(19) vmaxe     - Highest velocity in the envelope where the (an, ai) ion
                 is present.  Units are in 1000's of km/s.

(20) ve        - If pwrlaw is set to .false., then the optical depths
                 of the lines are assumed to fall off exponentially.  Each
                 individual line is allowed to have its own e-folding
                 length (which is ve for that an, ai ion).  The units
                 of ve are in 1000's of km/s.

(21) temp      - Excitation temperature of the ion in 1000's of K.  This
                 temperature is the temperature used to determine all lines
                 relative to the reference line, assuming Boltzmann excitation.

Running SYNOW
-------------

When you run synow, you will get the following output to STDOUT.

 $ synow
 INITIALIZING
 INITIALIZATION COMPLETE FOR   1 SPECIES
 ON FILE   6 of   9
 ON FILE   7 of   9
 ON FILE   8 of   9
 ON FILE   9 of   9
 ALMOST DONE
 $

The in.dat in the introduction is the one used.  Note that there, numref
was set to 2, but here it says that 1 species was initialized.  That is
because the He II we included we set to have optical depth zero in its
reference line at the photosphere.  So SYNOW ignored it.  Also note that
we had two other ions in our an, ai list.  They were S II and C II.  
But since we set numref to 2, they were ignored.  

The ``files'' that SYNOW is talking about are line list files.  The 
Kurucz linelist has been stored on disk on our network for special use
with SYNOW in a highly compact form.  If your simulation will take into
account a lot of lines, your code will run slower, but should still take
at most only a few minutes.  For a spectrum with only a few lines, you
don't even have time for a sip of coffee.

The actual output spectrum of synow is placed into the file called ``fort.11''
which is created by SYNOW each time it runs.  Make sure not to overwrite it!
After running SYNOW, you can look at fort.11 using some tool like xmgrace
or gnuplot.  The first two columns are the important ones.  The last one
is just the blackbody spectrum of the photosphere.

A good idea is to write a shell script to keep track of old in.dat files,
and corresponding fort.11 files.  Often, a real SN spectrum is plotted 
over a synthetic SYNOW spectrum, and repeated adjustments are made to 
the in.dat file until the spectra match.  This is kind of an art.


